Revise and extend semantic conventions for databases (#575)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/trace/semantic_conventions/database.md

| JDBC Clients | `db.jdbc.driver_classname` | The fully-qualified class name of the JDBC driver used to connect, e.g., `"org.postgresql.Driver"` or `"com.microsoft.sqlserver.jdbc.SQLServerDriver"`. | No |

[instance name]: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/connect/jdbc/building-the-connection-url?view=sql-server-ver15

- Microsoft SQL Server:
  - If setting a `db.mssql.instance_name`, `net.peer.port` is no longer required (but still recommended if non-standard).

## Call-level attributes

These attributes may be different for each operation performed, even if the same connection is used for multiple operations.
Usually only one `db.name` will be used per connection though.

| Attribute name | Notes and examples                                           | Required? |
| :------------- | :----------------------------------------------------------- | --------- |
| `db.name`  | If no tech-specific attribute is defined below, this attribute is used to report the name of the database being accessed. For commands that switch the database, this should be set to the target database (even if the command fails). | Yes (if applicable and no more specific attribute is defined) |

> | `db.statement` | The database statement being executed.. Note that the value may be sanitized to exclude sensitive information. E.g., for `db.system="generic_sql"`, `"SELECT * FROM wuser_table"`; for `db.system="redis"`, `"SET mykey 'WuValue'"`. | Yes (if applicable)       |

Reviewer: It's a bit unclear how strong this `E.g.` is, i.e. should redis statements always have this format?

Main reason to confirm is for example, Lettuce provides the command in a special format and if we wanted to make this consistent, we'd need to parse

https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/blob/master/instrumentation/lettuce/lettuce-5.1/src/test/groovy/io/opentelemetry/auto/instrumentation/lettuce/v5_1/LettuceSyncClientTest.groovy#L340

Author: It would of course be ideal to have a well-defined grammar for each DBMS we're interested in. For SQL databases, there is a natural string-based representation of statements, namely the SQL statement, which many backends will be able to parse (including major SQL dialects). For all other DBMS, we would either have to use an existing, suitable string representation, add dedicated, structured attributes for that technology or come up with our own grammar to meld it into a single string.

For Redis in particular, each statement can be expressed using the syntax used in the CLI and also in the documentation. I'm not sure if all (relevant) client libraries offer a reasonably easy way to retrieve intercepted commands in this representation but I'd prefer to just use that syntax instead of having to come up with our own. For your example above, it would look like shown here: https://redis.io/commands/hmset
What do you think?

Reviewer: Nice link - yeah I think it's reasonable to expect syntax if it's well documented, and taking advantage of the CLI documentation seems reasonable to me. We should make sure to provide a link to that reference though for the systems where it's ambiguous (I agree SQL isn't ambiguous, it's literally a text query engine). Maybe we can start a table with links to reference docs like this CLI doc for redis, and for future similar engines, we'll continue to add to it?

Author: Sounds good! I added a note for Redis in 050039d and we can extend it as needed.

> | `db.operation` | The name of the operation being executed, e.g. the [MongoDB command name][] such as `findAndModify`. While it would semantically make sense to set this, e.g., to an SQL keyword like `SELECT` or `INSERT`, it is *not* recommended to attempt any client-side parsing of `db.statement` just to get this property (the back end can do that if required). | Yes, if `db.statement` is not applicable.       |

Reviewer: When would this be different from the span name?

Author: This is an alternative for `db.statement`. If an SQL statement is supplied, `db.operation` should not be set and would thus be different from the non-empty span name. In this case, `db.statement` would include the entire SQL statement including the values of variable arguments whereas the span name is a low-carnality identifier for the kind of statement being executed.
If no SQL statement but the operation is supplied, the span name might likely be the same though. However, in general, the span name is more flexible with a couple of different alternatives and also more likely to be stripped/abbreviated. It is therefore no alternative for a dedicated, well-defined attribute that is reliable and suitable for analyzers in the backend. Please also see the guidance on what the span name should be set to starting in line 17 above.

Reviewer: Thanks I missed line 17. I'm still not sure what types of operations would be "stripped/abbrevations". Can you give some examples?

Span name identifies the work of a span - so I'm not being able to imagine when that would be different from the db operation (I'm assuming we expect mongo to use `findAndModify` for the span name in the example right?). I think some example spans, so tuples of span name, db.statement, db.operation, can clear this up nicely.

Author: For the operation name itself it should actually be fine to supply the entire name as span name but if it's a page-long SQL statement it should probably be stripped (in addition to using placeholders instead of actual parameter values to satisfy the low cardinality requirement). This is, however, more a UI concern since the span name is what's showing up in the UI on the backend first - there it will be abbreviated to fit the screen anyway.
Again, in many cases if there is only the operation with no statement being set, it will indeed match the span name. With the variety of alternatives allowed for the span name, however, this can not be applied the other way round so I would not just assume the span name is exactly the operation/function name called on the database. If there are, for example, different function names for each data type where overloading is not supported, it might make sense to have `setValue` as span name (i.e. the logical work being done) and `setValueInteger` or `setValueFloat` as operation since that's the actual function being called.

Reviewer: From what I understand the page long sql would go in statement and not operation. So yeah, it seems like operation is often same as the name. But I see your examples make sense too (personally haven't used a database with commands like that). Adding those examples to the doc would make it much more intuitive for me.

Alternately, if we want to make the spec more simple, only the strict definitions, it could also make sense to add `RATIONALE` docs with more of these discussions / examples to provide more context. PRs are temporal but a lot of the discussions are actually long standing and nice to capture into the code somewhere, if not necessarily this file. Hope that motivation makes sense.

Author: By the way there is also a discussion about span name being both a low-cardinality grouping key and human-readable display name at the same time in #557.

I also mentioned my concerns about relying on the exact content and syntax of the span name here https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/604#discussion_r435978191 and explained why I prefer dedicated, well-defined attributes with a single meaning for use in analyzers rather than the human-readable name used for the UI, which sometimes has ambiguous definitions or rather loose, best-effort requirements.

Author: We haven't added a separate RATIONALE doc anywhere yet as far as I know but usually add (non-normatively worded) explanatory notes right in the spec instead. I think that's fine because this way people can read both at the same time whereas in a separate doc it would just be more likely to be overlooked or go out of sync with spec changes. You could propose your suggestion in a separate issue to discuss this with more people though if you'd like.

Reviewer: I agree that there is some tension here between the human readable aspect of spans and concrete metadata. Just, I've seem many spans before and I couldn't imagine any where the name wouldn't match the operation, so expect other readers exist that would be confused too. Just a few examples would help :) If they're too verbose to put here I'd suggest we consider another doc, but if they make sense here then that's great too.

Author: @anuraaga I added some examples in ccefcfc. The Redis examples shows where a descriptive, low-cardinality span name is provided and the full statement, which is different from the span name, is provided for the `db.statement` attribute. The MongoDb sample sets the span name to the name of the collection _and_ the operation (as we would also have it in an SQL statement, for example, where you see both the operator _and_ affected table(s)) but the value provided for `db.operation` is only the operation itself and set to the exact name of the respective command as defined in the MongoDb API. In both cases the span name is set to a reasonable, descriptive and low-cardinality name that works well as a UI identifier and grouping key but matches neither the statement nor operation.

Reviewer: Thanks! LGTM

# Semantic conventions for database client calls

<!-- Re-generate TOC with `markdown-toc --no-first-h1 -i` -->

<!-- toc -->

- [Connection-level attributes](#connection-level-attributes)
  * [Notes and well-known identifiers for `db.system`](#notes-and-well-known-identifiers-for-dbsystem)
  * [Connection-level attributes for specific technologies](#connection-level-attributes-for-specific-technologies)
- [Call-level attributes](#call-level-attributes)
  * [Call-level attributes for specific technologies](#call-level-attributes-for-specific-technologies)
- [Examples](#examples)
  * [MySQL](#mysql)
  * [Redis](#redis)
  * [MongoDB](#mongodb)

<!-- tocstop -->

> For database client calls the `SpanKind` MUST be `Client`.

Reviewer 2: I would prefer formatting as in https://github.com/dynatrace-oss-contrib/opentelemetry-specification/blob/semconv-db/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/messaging.md#conventions, e.g.

```suggestion
**Span kind:** MUST always be `CLIENT`.
```

> The _span name_ should be set to a low cardinality value representing the statement executed on the database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The **span name** SHOULD be set to a low cardinality value representing the statement executed on the database.
```

It may be a stored procedure name (without arguments), SQL statement without variable arguments, operation name, etc.

> When it's impossible to get any meaningful representation of the span name, it can be populated using the same value as `db.name` or the tech-specific database name.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When it's otherwise impossible to get any meaningful span name, `db.name` or the tech-specific database name MAY be used.
```

## Connection-level attributes

These attributes will usually be the same for all operations performed over the same database connection.
Some database systems may allow a connection to switch to a different `db.user`, for example, and other database systems may not even have the concept of a connection at all.

| Attribute name | Notes and examples                                           | Required? |
| :------------- | :----------------------------------------------------------- | --------- |

> | `db.system`    | An identifier for the database management system (DBMS) product being used. See list below for well-known identifiers. | Yes       |

Reviewer 2: "list below" should be a link.

Also

```suggestion
| `db.system`    | An identifier for the database management system (DBMS) product being used. See below for a list of well-known identifiers. | Yes       |
```

(and make "list of well-known identifies" the link)

> | `db.system`    | An identifier for the database management system (DBMS) product being used. See list below for well-known identifiers. | Yes       |

Author: ```suggestion
| `db.system`    | An identifier for the database management system (DBMS) product being used. See below for a [list of well-known identifiers](#notes-and-well-known-identifiers-for-dbsystem). | Yes       |
```

| `net.peer.name` | Defined in the general [network attributes][]. | See below |
| `net.peer.ip`   | Defined in the general [network attributes][]. | See below |
| `net.peer.port` | Defined in the general [network attributes][]. | See below |
| `net.transport` | Defined in the general [network attributes][]. | See below |

At least one of `net.peer.name` or `net.peer.ip` from the [network attributes][] is required and `net.peer.port` is recommended.
If using a port other than the default port for this DBMS, `net.peer.port` is required.
Furthermore, it is strongly recommended to add the [`net.transport`][] attribute and follow its guidelines.
For in-process databases, `net.transport` MUST be set to `"inproc"`.

[network attributes]: span-general.md#general-network-connection-attributes
[`net.transport`]: span-general.md#nettransport-attribute

### Notes and well-known identifiers for `db.system`

This is a non-exhaustive list of well-known identifiers to be specified for `db.system`.

If a value defined in this list applies to the DBMS to which the request is sent, this value MUST be used.
If no value defined in this list is suitable, a custom value MUST be provided.

> This custom value MUST be the name of the DBMS in lowercase and without a version number to stay consistent with existing identifiers.

Reviewer 2: Add a note to encourage those needing custom values to make a spec PR?

Author: Added in 685bc4e, WDYT?

The value `generic_sql` is intended as a fallback and MUST only be used if the DBMS is known to be SQL-compliant but the concrete product is not known to the instrumentation.
If the concrete DBMS is known to the instrumentation, its specific identifier MUST be used.

> | Value for `db.system` | Product name              | Note                           |

Reviewer 2: Please indicate in the note whether this is considered a SQL database.

| :-------------------- | :------------------------ | :----------------------------- |
| `"db2"`               | IBM Db2                   |                                |
| `"derby"`             | Apache Derby              |                                |
| `"hive"`              | Apache Hive               |                                |
| `"mariadb"`           | MariaDB                   |                                |
| `"mssql"`             | Microsoft SQL Server      |                                |
| `"mysql"`             | MySQL                     |                                |
| `"oracle"`            | Oracle Database           |                                |
| `"postgresql"`        | PostgreSQL                |                                |
| `"sqlite"`            | SQLite                    |                                |
| `"teradata"`          | Teradata                  |                                |

> | `"generic_sql"`       | Generic SQL Database      | Fallback only. See note above. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `"other_sql"`       | Some other SQL Database | Fallback only. See note above. |
```

No strong opinion though.

| `"dynamodb"`          | Amazon DynamoDB           |                                |
| `"hbase"`             | HBase                     |                                |
| `"mongodb"`           | MongoDB                   |                                |
| `"neo4j"`             | Neo4j                     |                                |
| `"redis"`             | Redis                     |                                |

Back ends could, for example, use the provided identifier to determine the appropriate SQL dialect for parsing the `db.statement`.

When additional attributes are added that only apply to a specific DBMS, its identifier SHOULD be used as a namespace in the attribute key as for the attributes in the sections below.

### Connection-level attributes for specific technologies

| Technology | Attribute name | Notes and examples                                           | Required? |
| ---------- | :------------- | :----------------------------------------------------------- | --------- |
| Microsoft SQL Server | `db.mssql.instance_name` | The [instance name][] connecting to. This name is used to determine the port of a named instance. | See below. |

> | JDBC Clients | `db.jdbc.driver_classname` | The fully-qualified class name of the JDBC driver used to connect, e.g., `"org.postgresql.Driver"` or `"com.microsoft.sqlserver.jdbc.SQLServerDriver"`. | No |

Reviewer 2: Link to some definition of JDBC and maybe spell it out somewhere to make clear that this is a Java technology?

[instance name]: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/connect/jdbc/building-the-connection-url?view=sql-server-ver15

> - Microsoft SQL Server:

Reviewer 2: This is missing some sort of heading/intro paragraph.

Author: It's an addition to the table right above it. I don't think that adding `#### Notes` or similar here would look better or add any value.

Reviewer 2: Ah, it's referenced by the "see below". OK then 👌

[MongoDB command name]: https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/command/#database-operations

For Redis, the value provided for `db.statement` SHOULD correspond to the syntax of the Redis CLI.
If, for example, the [`HMSET` command][] is invoked, `"HMSET myhash field1 'Hello' field2 'World'"` would be a suitable value for `db.statement`.

[`HMSET` command]: https://redis.io/commands/hmset

### Call-level attributes for specific technologies

| Technology | Attribute name | Notes and examples                                           | Required? |
| ---------- | :------------- | :----------------------------------------------------------- | --------- |
| Cassandra | `db.cassandra.keyspace` | The name of the keyspace being accessed. To be used instead of the general `db.name` attribute. | Yes |

> | HBase | `db.hbase.namespace` | The [HBase namespace][hbase ns] being accessed. To be used instead of the general `db.name` attribute. | Yes |

Reviewer 2: Nit: Use

```suggestion
| HBase | `db.hbase.namespace` | The [HBase namespace][] being accessed. To be used instead of the general `db.name` attribute. | Yes |
```

and update anchor below accordingly.

> | HBase | `db.hbase.namespace` | The [HBase namespace][hbase ns] being accessed. To be used instead of the general `db.name` attribute. | Yes |
> | MongoDB | `db.mongodb.collection` | The collection being accessed within the database stated in `db.name`. | Yes |
> 
> [hbase ns]: https://hbase.apache.org/book.html#_namespace

Author: ```suggestion
| HBase | `db.hbase.namespace` | The [HBase namespace][] being accessed. To be used instead of the general `db.name` attribute. | Yes |
| MongoDB | `db.mongodb.collection` | The collection being accessed within the database stated in `db.name`. | Yes |

[HBase namespace]: https://hbase.apache.org/book.html#_namespace
```

In some **SQL** databases, the database name to be used for `db.name` is called "schema name".

> **Redis** does not have a database name to use for `db.name`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Redis** does not have a database name, so `db.name` MUST be empty.
```

Author: I'd leave it open to add a custom name and in any case allow providing the Redis database index, especially if it's not the default `0`.

Reviewer 2: In that case I would remove this line altogether or be more specific.

Author: I added a separate attribute `db.redis.database_index` to be used instead of `db.name` in 6f517d4.
cc @anuraaga

<!-- tocstop -->

For database client calls the `SpanKind` MUST be `Client`.

The _span name_ should be set to a low cardinality value representing the statement executed on the database.
It may be a stored procedure name (without arguments), SQL statement without variable arguments, operation name, etc.
When it's impossible to get any meaningful representation of the span name, it can be populated using the same value as `db.name` or the tech-specific database name.

## Connection-level attributes

These attributes will usually be the same for all operations performed over the same database connection.
Some database systems may allow a connection to switch to a different `db.user`, for example, and other database systems may not even have the concept of a connection at all.

| Attribute name | Notes and examples                                           | Required? |
| :------------- | :----------------------------------------------------------- | --------- |
| `db.type`      | Database type. For any SQL database, `"sql"`. For others, the lower-case database category, e.g., `"cassandra"`, `"hbase"`, `"mongodb"`, or `"redis"`. | Yes       |

> | `db.dbms`      | An identifier for the DBMS (database management system) product. E.g., `"mssql"`, `"mysql"`, `"oracle"`, `"db2"`, `"postgresql"`. | No, but recommended for `db.type="sql"` |

Reviewer 3: Do we really need to split these? Can we simply use directly the name "mysql" in `db.type`? What is the benefit of splitting?

Also a bit confused HBase vs Bigtable for example both are "column-oriented database" should we use that as a type, or maybe consider the type "sql" vs "no-sql"?

Can we just have one attribute that includes the "dbms" and that's it?

Author: I left the definition of `db.type` unchanged (as it was originally taken over from OpenTracing). I think the high-level distinction of categories of DBMS in `db.type` could be beneficial for many backends:

SQL databases share a lot in common, so a backend could rely on `db.type="sql"` for some assertions and also, for example, try to parse `db.statement` as an SQL statement.
If `db.dbms` is set and known to the backend, it could also try parsing it with respect to the SQL dialect expected (and use `db.dbms` in filters and for displaying the right icon and such).
If `db.dbms` is not set or uknown to the backend, it would still know it's a SQL database since `db.type="sql"`.
If there was only one attribute, the backend would need to have an exhaustive list of all `db.type`/`db.dbms` values that are SQL databases which would be hard to maintain.

NoSQL databases generally share less in common (particularly in regards to their query language) so distinguishing these separately in `db.type` also makes sense to me. The value for `db.dbms` is less important for these, however, since there is usually only one notable implementation per kind/category of NoSQL DB and other implementations are usually drop-in replacements without deviations in their query language.

As for your examples I'd treat these as separate `db.type="hbase"|"bigtable"`.
However, I'd also be open for dropping `db.type` in favor of an attribute `db.sql_like` (required) in addition to `db.dbms` if SQL vs NoSQL is the only reasonable distinction to make.

Reviewer 2: IMHO: "column-oriented database" is just a post-hoc concept that was invented to describe similarities between similar NoSQL DBs. SQL is an ISO standard and DBs are designed to implement that standard (mostly :wink:). So you can't compare "SQL DB" and "column-oriented DB", they are different categories.

What is more, SQL is a particular type of Relational DBs, so the hierarchy would be more like this:
* Relational DBs
  * DBs with SQL APIs
    * Oracle
    * MySQL
  * DBs with other APIs (mostly historical I guess)
* Column-oriented DBs
  * Cassandra
* Documented oriented DBs
  * Couch*
    * CouchBase
    * CouchDB
...

So you see, SQL is actually on the same level as cassandra from that point of view.

Reviewer 4: +1 to just `db.dbms`. Also `db.dbms` could be `db.system` to better align with `rpc.system` & `messaging.system` and avoid stuttering and vars like `dbDBMS`...

Author: Once we finally have the YAML definitions (#547), these will be able to provide a (long but non-exhaustive) list of well-known DBMS which should cover all DB vendors that are relevant for most tracing backends. This way, the backend can use these well-known values for all desired special handling (or just have a simple mapping if SQL or not). This would make the distinction between `type` and `dbms` redundant and I'd be willing to remove it under this assumption.

As for the name, I find `dbms` clearer and `db.dbms` not too bad (I don't expect people to pronounce the attribute keys very often) but aligning it with RPC and messaging sounds reasonable, @vmihailenco.

Would the others be fine with dropping `db.type` in favor of `db.system` (née `db.dbms`)?

Author: I'd also add a general `db.system="sql"` value for generic ODBC-like instrumentations that do not know the exact DBMS being accessed as a fallback, this would also still allow for best effort handling on the tracing backend.
If it is known, however, the actual DBMS should be reported (unlike the current `db.type="sql"` in all cases, regardless of the DBMS).

Reviewer 2: I think SQL could warrant a special case. Maybe after merging name + type into a single attribute, have a `db.statement.is_sql:true` value attached to the Span. Or `db.well_known_api:sql` (Can't think of any value other than `sql` that would warrant setting such a field though).

Author: @bogdandrutu @vmihailenco Would my proposal work for you?

- dropping `db.type`
- renaming `db.dbms` to `db.system` to align with other semconvs (msg, rpc)
- adding a fallback `db.system="sql"` _only_ for when the exact system is unknown but known to be SQL (as opposed to the current `db.type` which is always "sql", without any information about the DBMS being used)

We can consider @Oberon00's addition to that separately.

PS: @open-telemetry/specs-approvers, feel free to add your opinion as well.

Author: After receiving some thumbs up, I revised the PR as mentioned above.

Please note that the list of well-known identifiers is by no means complete and does not assume any significance for the listed DBMS. Having a list of well-known values, however, is the only reasonable way to allow back ends to analyze and group data based on the DBMS.
Further identifiers can be added at any time.

Once we have #547/#571 for defining semconvs using YAML, the specified values can be defined using an enumeration therein and, for example, be used to generate enums for each language implementation.

Author: @bogdandrutu PTAL

| `db.connection_string` | The connection string used to connect to the database. It is recommended to remove embedded credentials. | No       |
| `db.user`      | Username for accessing the database, e.g., `"readonly_user"` or `"reporting_user"` | No        |
| `net.peer.name` | Defined in the general [network attributes][]. | See below |
| `net.peer.ip`   | Defined in the general [network attributes][]. | See below |
| `net.peer.port` | Defined in the general [network attributes][]. | See below |
| `net.transport` | Defined in the general [network attributes][]. | See below |

> At least one of `net.peer.name` or `net.peer.ip` from the [network attributes][] is required and `net.peer.port` is recommended.

Reviewer 5: I don't think any of these can be required. Instrumentation may not know any of that.

Author: ```diff
- Additionally at least one of `net.peer.name` or `net.peer.ip` from the [network attributes][] is required and `net.peer.port` is recommended.
+ At least one of `net.peer.name` or `net.peer.ip` from the [network attributes][] is required and `net.peer.port` is recommended.
```

This requirement was already there before, I just added the attributes to the table so they're not overlooked that easily.
An instrumentation should be able to capture it, otherwise there will only be little value if the database is unknown. In which cases would it not know about that, given that we expect instrumentation to be built-in into the database client library?

Author: @yurishkuro ping ^^^

Reviewer 2: After #653, maybe this can be updated in a follow-up (or as part of #653). As of now, it seems there is not much point in bikeshedding over required vs recommended.

> If using a port other than the default port for this DBMS, `net.peer.port` is required.

Reviewer 5: Instrumentation may not know anything about ports.

Author: @yurishkuro see the response to your comment above https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/575#discussion_r435040277

Furthermore, it is strongly recommended to add the [`net.transport`][] attribute and follow its guidelines.

> For in-process databases, `net.transport` MUST be set to `"inproc"`.

Reviewer 5: knowledge of in-process vs. external DB my be abstracted away from instrumentation.

Author: @yurishkuro see the response to your comment above https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/575#discussion_r435040277

While `db.dbms` is optional, it is strongly recommended to set it if `db.type="sql"`.
For other `db.type`s, it is still recommended but less important since there is usually only one significant implementation per type.

Note: Future version of this semantic convention could provide a list of well-known values for `db.type` and `db.dbms` to allow back ends to analyze the data further.
Back ends could, for example, use the value of `db.dbms` to determine the appropriate SQL dialect for parsing the `db.statement`.

[network attributes]: span-general.md#general-network-connection-attributes
[`net.transport`]: span-general.md#nettransport-attribute

### Connection-level attributes for specific technologies

| Technology | Attribute name | Notes and examples                                           | Required? |
| ---------- | :------------- | :----------------------------------------------------------- | --------- |

> | Microsoft SQL Server | `db.mssql.instance_name` | The [instance name][] connecting to. This name is used to determine the port of a named instance. | See below. |

Reviewer 6: Although good overall, I'm afraid we will end up with *too many* very DB-specific attributes.

Guess the question is: how specific do we want to get?

Reviewer 2: So your suggestion is to only have a minimal subset of DB conventions here? Or use more generic attributes (how would that look here)?

Personally, I don't think there is any harm in having more attributes specified than needed in a particular case. It's not like they are required. My fear is that for every attribute we do not specify but people find useful, they will squeeze it in somehow, and in different ways for each instrumentation.

Reviewer 6: More generic attributes for these very specific things. No strong feelings though.

| JDBC Clients | `db.jdbc.driver_classname` | The fully-qualified class name of the JDBC driver used to connect, e.g., `"org.postgresql.Driver"` or `"com.microsoft.sqlserver.jdbc.SQLServerDriver"`. | No |

[instance name]: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/connect/jdbc/building-the-connection-url?view=sql-server-ver15

- Microsoft SQL Server:
  - If setting a `db.mssql.instance_name`, `net.peer.port` is no longer required (but still recommended if non-standard).

## Call-level attributes

These attributes may be different for each operation performed, even if the same connection is used for multiple operations.
Usually only one `db.name` will be used per connection though.

| Attribute name | Notes and examples                                           | Required? |
| :------------- | :----------------------------------------------------------- | --------- |

> | `db.name`  | If no tech-specific attribute is defined below, this attribute is used to report the name of the database being accessed. For commands that switch the database, this should be set to the target database (even if the command fails). | Yes (if applicable and no more specific attribute is defined) |

Reviewer 4: This is moderately useful, but realistically there are very few apps that access more than one database (if we talk about MySQL/Postgres). I am yet to see app that uses commands to switch database. I think much more useful concept would be recording table name:
- but there can be multiple table names in one query
- for Mongodb you recommend using `db.mongodb.collection` - I guess for MySQL it will be `db.mysql.table` or similar

So my question is - can we agree on a single attribute name to record multiple table names that works at least for MySQL, Postgres, MongoDB etc? Something like `db.names []string`.

Author: Regarding switching the database:
You will often have a database name stated in the connection string that is only used to define the _default_ database that you're connecting to first. Once you have the server connection established, you can execute a `USE db_name` statement to switch to a different database within that server. Please note that what is addressed as "database" for the database name is not the entire "physical" server or DBMS setup, this one would be defined by the connection string or `net.peer.*` attributes. Database in this sense refers to the "logical" database contained in the server/DBMS, of which might be one to many. For SQL database systems, databases are collections of tables (and other entities).

Author: Regarding table names:
Since tables are a concept all SQL databases share, I'd prefer introducing a general `db.sql.tables[]` attribute for reporting all tables affected by a query.
However, this might often be hard for the instrumentation to populate when it is just intercepting a ready-made query so I wouldn't make this a MUST requirement. Some backends will even be able to parse the SQL query to figure out affected table names, if this is desired.

Reviewer 4: Thanks - that sounds good!

I was suggesting to use `db.names` since potentially it can be used to store Redis keys, but I guess your suggestion would be to use `db.redis.keys` instead. I understand the point that `db.sql.tables` and `db.redis.keys` are more specific/understandable, but with `db.sql.tables` we assume that humans are able to understand that `db.sql.tables` means Postgres table names if `db.type == "postgres"`. I hope that we can extend that logic to
- `db.tables` means Postgres tables if db.type is postgres
- `db.tables` means Redis keys if db.type is redis

Overall my intention is to reuse keys whenever possible in order to reduce number of columns required to store the data in backends. I guess misuse the term but I would even say that semantically `db.sql.tables` and `db.redis.keys` mean the same concepts. What do you think?

Author: For information with different names/terms or with the same name but different semantics I'd favor using separate, dedicated attributes.
I would generally rather avoid generic attributes which can only be populated and interpreted under guidance provided in prose in the semantic conventions along the lines _"If the db.type is Redis, these are the names of affected keys, if the db.type is SQL, these are the names of affected tables, ..."_.
`db.name` (or `db.instance`, if preferred), for example, is already a compromise in that direction but having a named logical database is something I deemed generic enough to apply to all kinds of databases (except for Redis, for example -- see, it's hard to generalize 😅).

I understand your intention which would make things easier if the backend would store attributes 1:1 in a database. However, with the approach of having separate attributes, each one would clearly convey what it is about without the need of a logic that depends on other attributes to interpret these correctly. The backend's ingest/analyzer logic could take these keys and map them to an internal data structure for storage, not all will store attributes 1:1. Some backends might even feature a ruleset editor where each customer can define their own mapping from OTel attributes to the generic data structure and terminology already in use at that backend and also populated by sources other than OTel. Some backends likely also won't store SQL database spans and Redis spans in the same data structure at all.
 
That's my personal feeling/opinion, however. I'd love to hear some more opinions from others so that we can find a suitable compromise on specialization and explicitness vs. generalization (including @open-telemetry/specs-approvers 👋🙂). I think this is something we cannot decide universally for all attributes but should consider separately for each one.
